Hi there.
This is De La Rue.
And welcome back.
Let's now look at something called method overloading.
Sometimes it makes sense to maintain multiple versions of the same method within the same class.
And by multiple versions we mean that the methods will have the same name but would take different input
data.
That is only the method.
Parameters would differ.
And this feature is referred to as method overloading.
In some scenarios, providing overloaded methods could be an important requirement of the software,
while in some other scenarios they may simply serve as convenience to the clients clients being the
method in workers.
So that method overloading multiple methods within the same class have same name, but they have different
parameter lists.
So to overload a method, you must change the parameter list.
And changing the parameter list would imply that the number of the parameters or the parameter types
are both would be different.
Changing.
Only the return type does not work.
On both instance and static methods can be overloaded.
And here are some valid method overloading examples where the methods have the same name but different
parameter lists.
Note that in the second and third example, the order of the method parameter types has changed, and
that's good enough to make it a valid method overloading example.
In the second example we have int followed by car, whereas in the third we have car followed by the
end.
Now, for example, is interesting and you need to keep it in mind.
It has short as a parameter type, while the first example has it as parameter type.
That is, both are integer data types, but the two methods still qualify as valid examples of method
overloading.
So the number of parameters is same.
It's just that the parameter type has changed, but they are still compatible method parameter types,
but still it would qualify as a valid example.
So it would be valid as long as the parameters are not exactly identical.
Now let's look at a few method invocation statements for this particular example.
Now, if this is a method invocation statement, then it would invoke the second overloaded method as
first argument is and while second is can.
And if we have this, then this will invoke the first method.
And that's because 2000 is an intellectual.
And the first method also accepts an INT data type.
So even though fourth method has short as data type and 1000 can be assigned to short but still fast
one is picked as it is an exact match.
So the compiler tries to find a method having parameters with the exact same data type.
But if we have something like this where the variable B is a byte and B is the argument in the method
invocation.
Then in this case, the last method which shot as the method parameter type would be invoked.
In this case, compiler would first try to find a method with the same parameter.
That is, if there is an update profile method with bypass as parameter type.
And since it's not there, then it would see if there is a method that has the next larger data type,
which would be the last method.
So since there is no exact match, the compiler is picking a method that has a compatible data type,
but the compatible data type should be most specific to.
So even though both first and last versions have compatible data types, the compiler picks the last
one as short as more specific than end.
That is, it is the next larger data type after byte.
Notice that I'm saying compiler picks what method needs to be invoked.
And that's because during compilation process, compiler writes into the byte code about the method
that needs to be invoked at runtime by JVM.
And this process of compiler picking the method to be invoked and subsequently JVM using that information
at runtime is called method binding and that is something we will discuss later in a different section
as it involves more discussion.
Notice that variable B here is initialized with a smaller value 50 rather than 1000.
And that's because 1000 does not fit into bytes range.
Now let's look at a few invalid overloading examples to let's say we have this method definition.
Now, if we add this new method within the same class, it would not be a valid method overload.
And that's because only the return type is different.
So this is illegal and the compiler would report that we have a duplicate method.
So we are going to have a compilation error.
And here is an obvious invalid example.
Simply changing only parameter name will not work here.
The parameter name is ID.
Well, the first method had it as new ID.
Adding a static method with the same method signature will also not work.
That is the first method in this case is an instance method.
While this is a static method.
So in all of the examples, we get a compiler error saying that a duplicate method is added.
So to have valid overloaded methods, the only requirement is parameter list must be different and the
method name should be same.
So that's about method overloading.
Now let's go ahead and do a quick demo of it.
Okay.
Here we are in the Basics Demo class, and in one of the earlier lectures we wrote this method called
Go, and that was when demonstrating pass by value mechanism for object references.
So let's go ahead and use this method in this demo also.
So let's go ahead and overload this method.
So here the parameter type is int array.
Let's write two more methods.
One will take an int as method parameter type, while the other a shot.
So let me just change this to end.
Let me call it AI and let me change this to shot.
So it is the similar example that we have seen in the slide.
Let me call it S.
And let me just copy this here.
Okay.
So two new overloaded methods have been added.
So we have three methods, three overloaded methods now.
So here we are already invoking this particular the first method here using an array.
Now let's say go of 1000.
We have seen this in the slide there.
The method name was update profile.
But here it is.
Go.
And let's also define this variable called B, which is of type byte.
I'm let's say, go off be.
So in this case, it would be the first method that gets invoked here.
The second go method gets invoked because thousand is an intellectual.
And the compiler would pick this one.
And the third one is byte.
So but byte doesn't go off.
Byte is not there.
So it's going to pick the the last method, which is the most specific one.
It's a compatible type and it has the next larger data type.
So let's just go ahead and compile and run this.
Here it is.
So when we invoked for the first time, it invoked the method that has the array as the parameter type.
Then when we passed 1000, it invoked the second one here go off and I and for the last one it invoked
go off shot as.
So that's it.
I would suggest just go ahead and type all of these methods and try it out and also try the invalid
examples which we have seen in the slide.
Now let me also show you a couple of examples in the Java library itself.
So this is the print stream class.
And print stream class is what is being used.
When we invoke system dot dot println, the println is part of the print stream class.
And let me show you the different println methods.
As you can see, there are different println methods and these are all overloaded methods.
So if you invoke println with a car as argument, then this method gets invoked.
If you pass a double, then this gets invoked.
And if you pass a string, then this gets invoked.
So that's where the print stream and another class here is called as arrays, which we will see in the
collections framework section.
So.
Here.
Also, it has a lot of methods.
And here you can see a bunch of sort methods which are all overloaded.
So this one takes a float array and this one takes float array along with two other end.
This one takes an end array.
So this method is responsible for sorting the elements of the array, whether it's in ascending order
or in certain order.
So all of these are also overloaded methods and they are needed for the for our programs.
And so the designers have exposed all of these methods.
So that's with the Java Library and that's what method overloading.
Thank you.
I'll see you in the next lecture.